The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today, presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
Our present show is an interview with author Jerry Pournelle. Pournelle began
writing science fiction fairly recently, in the 1970s, but he's already had a
huge impact on the field. He's been president of the Science Fiction Writers of
America, for instance. He's created a future history, an empire called the
Codominium, which is extrapolated from our present political situation. And he's
also co-authored with Larry Niven a number of well-known novels, the best
-selling Lucifer's Hammer, a graphic fictional study of what might happen should
a comet hit Earth is one of them. And The Mote in God's Eye, perhaps the best
first contact novel written to date. More recently, however, his career has
taken a new turn. He's dedicated himself to the future of the planet Earth. He's
trying to revive the United States space program and is working on a federal
committee to that end. He writes a science column for Galaxy Magazine. And he's
recently published a non-fiction book titled A Step Farther Out, which consists
of essays on potential methods of spaceflight, on plans on how we could colonize
the solar system, and an explanation of the L5 Society. He's gotten a deserved
reputation as one of the country's foremost futurists. His concern about our
future was evident when he spoke to the Science Fiction Radio Show.
In The Mote in God's Eye, your co-author Larry Niven and you were trying to
write what I believe you called the epitome of a first contact novel. You must
have had to develop quite a bit of background information for that, didn't you?
Yeah, we probably have as much material in notes for that book as there is in
the book. Not sure what to do with it anymore, but we had several notebooks full
of stuff. Civilizations and histories and the rest of it.
In general, like developing the Mote culture. Yeah, well, we had to come up with
a rationale for why are they that way and how did they get to be that way and so
forth. It was, all we started with was an asymmetrical alien, which was
something that Larry had left over from a story longer that he'd never finished
writing.
And I can't work without knowing why things happen. Larry is a lot more able to
believe in six impossible things before breakfast than I am. So he can sit there
and write a story that you hadn't really believed could happen. I'm not very
good at that. I generally don't, I can't, I can't stay interested in something
unless I think it might happen. Which means that I have to work out how it could
have happened. So we ended up getting quite a lot of stuff on the subject of the
Mote. As far as I can see, they're a thoroughly self-consistent set of aliens.
Probably there's no such thing, but evolution could easily have come about, I
think. Why did you and Niven choose to put Mote and God's Eye in your future
history of the CoDominium? Oh, I don't know. We were looking, I didn't believe
in his future history. His known space theories has got, in my judgment, holds
you could drive a truck through. I just don't think it could happen. Neither
does he, by the way. So, which doesn't mean it's not interesting, because it is
interesting and a lot of fun. But again, I have this problem of not really being
able to do a lot of work on things that I don't believe in. So we built this
around Mars, around the stone artery, and it worked out. How did you put
together the CoDominium? Oh, I don't know. About the same way we're putting it
together in the real world, isn't it? It looks now as if the alliance seems to
be the United States and China, but it could just about as easily, given a few
changes in the structure of government in Russia, have been the United States
and Russia against China, couldn't it? Yeah, very possibly. And in fact, that
was a very logical way for things to have gone back in the 60s, when the Chinese
were running around trying to tear the world apart, you may remember? Yes.
They've got reasonable and the Russians didn't, as it happened, but it could
just as easily have gone the other way. So really, you took and extrapolated our
existing political situation. Yeah, well, I'm not convinced it won't happen yet,
of course. I mean, Brezhnev's got to go out of business one of these days, and
who knows who takes over over there? They don't know. Why should we know? I
don't suppose there's anybody in the world who knows who's going to be in charge
when Brezhnev goes out of business, right? Right. Including Brezhnev.
The United States at least has got a certain amount of stability in that you can
make a fairly short list of people who are likely to be president. And the
mechanism by which they get there is fairly well known. The mechanism by which
you get to be the unanimous choice of the Russian people to be their fearless
leader is not really known even to the Russians, is it? Not from what I can
tell. Well, you know, Brezhnev thought he had it set up at one point, and his
gun stuck in his pocket, quite literally. They had a shootout at a cabinet
meeting, and he lost. So you take the coefficient of friction of a gunfight
against a wool suit, and you throw that in as one of the important variables of
human history, right? Right. Since if Berea had been in charge, heaven knows
what happens. I suspect the CoDominium would have come about if Berea had taken
over instead of Khrushchev. He was just a cynical power broker. I doubt that he
believed in very much of anything. Perhaps you could give us a bit of background
information about yourself. Yeah, well, I used to write books before I took up
saving the space program for a living. It seems to be what I'm doing lately is
I'm sitting here with the telephone glued in my ear just before you called. I've
been on the phone to Washington for two hours, yesterday all day. We're running
around trying to rebuild the space program and still live within the budget
cuts. It's not easy to do. I'm chairman of a citizen's advisory group.
working on some plans for the administration, but that doesn't mean any
guarantee that they're going to take our advice. We have a problem right now in
that the administration wants to chop back the budget, which you can, which
certainly they've got to do. The country cannot go on like it. At the same time,
if they, if we don't keep up some investments in high technology, we're not
going to have anything to live off of. You've got to invest something once in a
while, you know. And unfortunately, the structure of the government and the tax
situation and the rest of it is such that you are not going to get private
investment in things as inherently risky as space technology. Because they don't
let you keep any of the profits. Profit's a nasty word nowadays. So who wants to
risk everything on something that you can't win on? So you're going to have to
have government research until they change some of the laws having to do with
the tax structure. And if we don't do that, then I guess we'll sit here and
become, we're already in underdevelopation. And if our major export is
agriculture, we're beginning to import high technology. We're buying airplanes
from overseas now. Can you imagine us? Eastern Airlines is now flying a thing
called the Airbus, which is made in Europe. American domestic airlines are
flying foreign airplanes. We're importing computers, and we're going to be doing
more of that pretty soon. We're an underdeveloped country. If we don't start
doing some investment, we're going to stay that way.
So that's what I have been doing for the last couple of weeks, which is why I
don't have a lot of thoughts on the subject of science fiction, because I'm
still sitting here in the eye of a storm trying to balance about 35 different
balls in the air and get a rational program for high technology investments that
make sense. You know, you talked about a lot of those same things in your book A
Step Further Out, didn't you? Yeah, right. Yeah, that's one reason why I seem to
be involved in doing some of these things and being in charge of a, not in
charge of, but sort of ringmaster to a fairly large group of scientists and
engineers, is because of that book, attracted a certain amount of attention. In
that book, you state that our, I guess, destiny is mankind, is linked to our
expanding ourselves into space. Yeah, well, you know, as I said in a step
further out, and I've said in other columns and other places, it's, how long is
the future? This, we presented this, Pasoni and I presented this in a paper to
an annual meeting of the American Association of Advancement of Science. That's
a, we think of it as a reasonably important philosophical question. How long is
the future? If it's, if it's the way matters and the, and, and Forrester and the
limits to growth people think, it's only a couple of hundred years, then there
is no point in worrying about it, and we might as well eat, drink, and be merry,
right? But if, on the other hand, the future is another, a billion generations,
a hundred billion years, then we had, we are not the same species as an outfit
that's going to live another 200 years, are we? And if mankind's future, too, is
a hundred billion years, and there's no reason why it should not be a hundred
billion years, then we're going to have to outlive the Earth, and indeed outlive
the Sun, and the solar system. We may even have to outlive this galaxy. Now,
there is nothing in principle that keeps us from doing that. I know of nothing
that could stop us other than ourselves. I've said this a lot of times, but I
don't know how I, you can't say it too often, one of the most ironic things that
ever happened was that just after we went to the moon, they held in Stockholm a
conference whose theme title was Only One Earth. And that's insane. We don't
live on only one Earth. We live our, we live if we want to in a system that's
got nine planets, and I used to say 38 moons, but now I think it's up to about
50. And a million asteroids, and a million comets. That's a lot of resources out
there, plus an enormous thermonuclear generator, which the Environmental
Protection Association would never let you activate that thermonuclear generator
out there. It's far too dangerous. We call it the Sun. But if we're going to
have a hundred billion year future, we've got to get off this ball, and we
better do it pretty quick, because it's fairly obvious that if we stay cooked up
here on it long enough, we're going to do something to ourselves that'll keep us
from going out there. So that's where some of us, like me, seem to get a little
shrill about it sometimes. It's a feeling of urgency here, because right now we
have the resources. Who knows how long we'll have them? Yeah, I was wondering,
is there some sort of timetable that we're sort of set into in getting into
space? Well, I don't know what you mean by timetable set into. Who would set it?
Well, are there any sort of resources, restrictions that would allow us to get
into space now, but maybe not later on? Your population pressures. If you
believe in the limits to growth model, we don't have very many more generations
of wealth. If you believe those models, you're going to have...
There are tremendous pressures to widely distribute the capital, right? At the
moment, Western civilization is a fairly wealthy island in the middle of a
pretty large sea of poverty. There are enormous pressures to sort of
redistribute the wealth, and if you do, then everybody is more or less
miserable. There will be very little wealth. Now, it's unlikely we're going to
actually do that, because very few people really popularize themselves
voluntarily. But on the other hand, that's a pretty ripe situation for breeding
wars. Bringing back the Code of Indian, by the way, my suspicion is that the
United States and the Soviet Union would rather allow to keep the so-called
third world countries from impoverishing them than... You see what I'm getting
at? Right. Our genuine foreign aid is... The United States has a fairly good
record of generosity on that, but it is still fairly small compared to our
national budget. We do not give until it hurts much, nor are we likely to, nor
do I think we should, because if we impoverish ourselves, no one will have the
resources to go to space. That's a very expensive proposition going to space,
right? It takes a peculiar combination of extra wealth, of educated people, high
talent, the machine shops, the resources, and the determination by somebody to
do it. All of those things have to come together at the same time. And that just
seems sufficiently fragile to me. In fact, the whole civilization seems fairly
fragile to me. Roberto Vacca wrote a pretty good book called The Coming Dark Age,
in which he discusses a number of fairly catastrophic scenarios, starting with,
oh, I don't know, widespread power failures, in which Western civilization just
essentially sort of collapses back into a level approximating the, oh, I don't
know, 1900 to 1920 era. Everybody's reasonably well off, but nobody's got a lot,
and there certainly isn't enough to go to space. A lot of autonomously small
communities living off the land, counters, and so forth, is a considerable
decrease in population. As he says, going off and living in the country in small
towns without modern convenience and everything is the sort of thing people do
now for fun, but it's not very amusing as a way of life, but it may well be the
way of life. You can easily see this kind of... Larry and I wrote a book called
Lucifer's Hammer about a natural disaster that can bring about much the same
kind of result. It's true, that's a rare one. I doubt to you that the world's
going to be whammed with a comet, but on the other hand, Alvarez at Berkeley,
the Nobel Prize physicist at Berkeley, has just come up with a fairly convincing
proof that that's what happened to the dinosaurs about 100 million years ago, is
that the Earth really did get whammed with something big and it killed them all
off. And furthermore, he seems to have demonstrated that it happens about every
100 million years and the last one happened 100 million years ago, which doesn't
mean it's going to happen this year. But I can think of a lot of things, from
wars to just general disorganization. We keep building bureaucratic structure
until we can't support the weight of it any longer. that would use up all the
resources that might take us to space, and if they're gone, how do you get
there? The interesting thing, I mean, space is expensive. Each Apollo shot costs
almost 15 days' supply of cigarettes. The amount of money that was spent on
Apollo would have kept the United States in liquor for a whole week. It's
expensive. It's not very expensive compared to a lot of things we do, but it's
still expensive. Even though there are some restrictions on us, you've talked
about in your articles about that we can survive, and if I might quote you, we
can survive with style. How might that be brought about? Well, I can give you
some ultimate scenarios. if, but we are trying to convince the present
administration of this, for essentially the same amount of money we're spending
on the space program now, redirected slightly, and with a little added to it, it
doesn't take much. We give you the following scenario. We could have, by 1988, a
space industrial park, which is essentially a housekeeping satellite that has
industrial facilities and power, air, oxygen, so what, and which private
companies could go up and put their own modules onto it to make things, and I
give you some ideas of things you can make in space you can't make. The yields
on ethical drug processes are enormous in space, and some drugs like uricanase
are worth a million dollars a kilogram. Now, you can make those in fairly large
quantities in space because you get perfect mixing and you've got good
temperature controls and there's all kinds of reasons why space turns out to be
a good place to do certain very high-value intrinsically low-yield chemical
processes. You can get yields that are thousands of times better than they are
on Earth. Turbine blades, magnets, the people talk about ball bearings, it's not
so clear that you can actually possibly manufacture ball bearings in space
because you can make them on Earth now. We don't play. Foam steel, ways of
making steel beams that are shot through with air bubbles in such a way that you
or I could pick one of them up, a string ten feet long by foot thick. You can
carry around with you but it's just about as strong as if it were solid. So that
sort of thing. Very long carbon crystal. There are a lot of products that we are
fairly certain would be profitable but fairly certain is not good enough that
anybody's going to risk going to all the expense of doing that by themselves.
out. But if you've got already the facility so that you're only having to spend
the private companies only having to spend the marginal cost of adding their own
module onto it and paying some rent to the government as a landlord, then it
becomes a much more attractive proposition particularly if you give them some
decent tax breaks. Now this can all be in place by 1988 but the year 2000 we can
be manufacturing things in space from materials taken from mines on the moon.
And all this at a level of U.S. expenditure that is not large compared to what
we're doing now. It's in the order of maybe 10 or 12 billion a year. Small
potatoes.
The United States spent like 5% of its national budget over a period of 10 years
on the Panama Canal. And I think everybody believes that was a good thing to do.
We did well by doing good. We don't have to spend anything like that. 2.5% of
our national budget on space over the next 20 years could probably make the
whole world rich. Certainly could keep us fabulously wealthy because the you
were talking about when you begin to manufacture things using power from space
and materials from the moon you were talking about actual new wealth. Something
that has never existed on this planet before. You're actually bringing wealth to
this planet. And that's quite a thing. it's all very possible. I mean it's not
dreams, it's not fantasy, there's nothing ridiculous about it. You have a
permanent moon base by the year 2000, you begin to get lunar colonies, I suspect
that people would choose to live there. Some will, some won't, some will. I'm
sure I could find 500 highly qualified families that would be willing to move to
the moon tomorrow knowing they'd never come back. And very qualified people. In
fact, I think very seriously about doing it myself. It's a new frontier and
there are always people who like frontier atmosphere. From there, the takeoff is
clear. There's no going back from that. And we have then ensured that there is
no single disaster that wipe out the whole human race. who's taken a pretty good
step towards fulfilling our national destiny of the human race, of building our
100 billion year future. And I would think that doing something like that would
be attractive to, I don't know, to the president. My suspicion is that the
statesman who put us in into space permanently would be remembered a lot longer
than Isabella the Great and Prince Henry the Navigator. I mean, would literally
be remembered through billions of years of human history. The man who put us
permanently into space, along with John Kennedy. Well, this is a seem to me like
a fairly attractive proposition for some statesman.
And it does not seem to me like an unpopular idea with the public. Look at the
big sales. Is there what, Star Wars is still the biggest moneymaker of all time?
Movie? Star Trek is still on in syndication 12, 14 years after the, this is
ridiculous. There's no science fiction books. I've got books in print that have
been going around for 10, 12 years, and I'm a relative newcomer to the field.
There are some science fiction books in print that are 30 years old. Now, who
won the Pulitzer Prize for literature 12 years ago? I'll bet his book's not in
print. I mean, you're not talking about something that's unpopular with the
people of this country. I think high technology is very popular. and look, you
look at the sales of science magazines now. Everywhere you turn around, there's
a new science magazine. So it would seem to me that here's a marvelous
opportunity for somebody to go out and do well by doing good, to become one of
the most famous people in history by doing something that is politically very
popular. God knows it didn't hurt John Kennedy any.
As you can tell from our conversation, Dr. Pournelle is concerned with the future.
His excitement about mankind's future is expressed in his fiction such as the
Janissaries and his latest book, King David's Spaceship, and in his nonfiction
such as A Step Further Out, which I highly recommend. With the advent of the
space shuttle, the opportunity to work in the space program and the newly
forming space industries will be opening up to everyone. If you are interested
in knowing more about what we discussed in this program, I suggest you contact
the L5 Society. Their address is
student memberships are $15 and regular memberships are $20. Both include the
monthly L5 newsletter.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson. This has been the Science
Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association in conjunction with KOCV-FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.